Pedro Martin WASM blog post (#91)
redbadger/awesome-badger: _posts/2026-03-09-wasm-beyond-the-browser-and-back-again.md

- Portable: the same `.wasm` binary runs on any platform with a WASM runtime
- Language-agnostic: you can compile Rust, C, C++, Go, and many other languages to WASM

```mermaid
graph LR
    A[Rust / C / Go] -->|compile| B[.wasm binary]
    B --> C[Browser]
    B --> D[Zed editor]
    B --> E[Node.js]
    B --> F[Cloudflare Workers]
    style B fill:#f9d71c,stroke:#333,color:#000
```

What makes WASM particularly compelling is the safety guarantee: since it runs in a sandbox, a host application can load and execute third-party WASM modules without worrying about them accessing the file system, network, or memory outside their allocated space. This is exactly why both browser extensions and code editors have adopted it as their extension format.

## How I first heard about it

I first came across WebAssembly through Stu, a colleague, who shared a message about it on Slack:

> On December 5, The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) announced that the WebAssembly Core Specification is now an official web standard. This makes WebAssembly the fourth language for the web, following HTML, CSS, and JavaScript.

He published on 26th December 2019

> It planted the seed, but at the time it felt like something reserved for game engines and image processing libraries — not the sort of thing I would use day to day.

Reviewer: This reads a little funky, how about something like. I mainly got confused by "he published" and after re-reading I understood you meant he sent that message on slack on 26th Dec:

```suggestion
After sending this message on 26th December 2019, it planted a seed, but it felt like something reserved for game engines and image processing libraries — not the sort of thing I would use day to day.
```

## My first encounter: a small language model

> My first real experience using WASM happened in an unexpected way. I was working on a project where we needed the browser to recognise images as part of a client’s Know Your Client (KYC) process. We used a third-party service, and my job was to connect our system to their API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
My first real experience using WASM happened in an unexpected way. I was working on a project where we needed the browser to recognise images as part of a client’s Know Your Customer (KYC) process. We used a third-party service, and my job was to integrate our system to their API.
```

> This was my first time using WASM in a real project. I also had to connect it to a third-party API and use a small built-in language model for image recognition. I learned a lot from this and realised how useful WASM can be in the browser.

Reviewer: What part of this was made using WASM?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was my first time using WASM in a real project. I also had to connect it to a third-party API and used a small built-in language model for image recognition. I learned a lot from this and realised how useful WASM can be in the browser.
```

Reviewer: `small built-in language model for image recognition` - was this build into the WASM code? Being a dev style blog post, the reader is interested in the juicy details!

> It was eye-opening to see that a machine learning model could run entirely on the user's computer, without sending information to a server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was eye-opening to see that a machine learning model could run entirely on the user's computer, without communicating information to a server.
```

Author: done

> This taught me something important about WASM: it’s not just a faster version of JavaScript. WASM allows you to use powerful tools and libraries from other languages, such as Rust, C, and Python, in places that previously supported only JavaScript. That’s why I chose Rust and WASM when I needed more advanced features in my browser extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This taught me something important about WASM: it’s not just a faster version of JavaScript. WASM allows you to use powerful tools and libraries from other languages, such as Rust, C, and Python, in places that previously supported only JavaScript. This led to my choice of Rust and WASM when I needed more advanced features in my browser extension.
```

Author: done

> ## The TypeScript interface problem

Reviewer: This section feels more suited towards the end (near criticisms) or as an appendix - it's interesting but breaks the flow of your article a bit. I'm thinking "why am I learning about this now" and doesn't again become relevant til much later on

1. Declare WASM as a web-accessible resource (`manifest.json`):

```json
{
  "web_accessible_resources": [
    {
      "resources": ["pkg/stained_wall_engine_bg.wasm"],
      "matches": ["<all_urls>"]
    }
  ]
}
```

2. Allow WASM evaluation in the CSP:

```json
{
  "content_security_policy": {
    "extension_pages": "script-src 'self' 'wasm-unsafe-eval'"
  }
}
```

3. Load the WASM module using `browser.runtime.getURL()`:

```typescript
const wasmUrl = browser.runtime.getURL('pkg/stained_wall_engine_bg.wasm');
await init({ module_or_path: wasmUrl });
const sitesJson = await fetch(browser.runtime.getURL('sites.json'));
engine = new Engine(await sitesJson.text());
```

One subtle challenge is timing. The content script might load before the WASM engine has finished initialising in the background script. To handle this, Stained Wall uses a dual messaging pattern:

- Push: the background script sends the plan to the content script as soon as the engine resolves it
- Pull: the content script also requests the plan from the background script as a fallback

> This ensures the plan reaches the content script regardless of initialisation order.

Reviewer: Bet that was fun to debug

Author: mjmm

### Safe DOM operations

MV3's strict CSP means you cannot use `element.innerHTML` to inject content. All DOM operations in Stained Wall use `DOMParser` instead:

```typescript
// Safe alternative using DOMParser
const parser = new DOMParser();
const doc = parser.parseFromString(html, 'text/html');
while (doc.body.firstChild) {
  element.appendChild(doc.body.firstChild);
}
```

This pattern is more verbose but eliminates any risk of XSS and keeps the extension compliant with MV3's security model.

## Zed MJML: a code editor extension I built, powered by WASM

### What is MJML?

[MJML](https://mjml.io/) is an email markup language that compiles to responsive HTML email. If you have ever tried to write HTML emails by hand — with their nested tables, inline styles, and inconsistent client support — you will appreciate why MJML exists. It provides a component-based syntax that handles the responsive email nightmare for you:

```html
<mjml>
  <mj-body>
    <mj-section>
      <mj-column>
        <mj-text>Hello world</mj-text>
        <mj-button href="https://example.com">Click me</mj-button>
      </mj-column>
    </mj-section>
  </mj-body>
</mjml>
```

> I used to do this by hand in Ye Old days (2015).

Reviewer: 😂

Author: Ancient

        direction TB
        BW[WASM Engine] -->|JSON plan| BTS[TypeScript]
        BTS -->|browser.* APIs| BDOM[DOM / Network]
        style BW fill:#f9d71c,stroke:#333,color:#000
    end

    subgraph "Zed Extension Pattern"
        direction TB
        ZW[WASM Bootstrap] -->|binary path| ZLSP[Native LSP Binary]
        ZLSP -->|LSP protocol| ZED[Zed Editor]
        style ZW fill:#f9d71c,stroke:#333,color:#000
        style ZLSP fill:#4ecdc4,stroke:#333,color:#000
    end
```

## What I learned

Building these two projects taught me that WASM is not a single thing — it is a spectrum of integration patterns. At one end, you have heavy WASM modules that perform substantial computation. At the other end, you have thin WASM wrappers that exist purely to satisfy a platform's extension format (like the Zed MJML extension).

The key is understanding what the host platform offers and what it constrains:

- If the host gives you rich APIs and a JavaScript runtime, lean into WASM for the logic that benefits from Rust's safety and performance.

- If the host gives you a strict sandbox with limited capabilities, use WASM as a bridge to native code where the real work happens.

> WASM's portability promise is real, but it is not about running the same code everywhere in the same way. It is about having a safe, sandboxed format that platforms can adopt as their extension mechanism — and then building the right architecture around it.

Reviewer: Great conclusion, love that

If you have not tried WASM yet, I would encourage you to start small. Pick a piece of logic that is well-defined and self-contained — a validator, a parser, a matcher — compile it to WASM, and see how it feels. You might be surprised at how natural it is to have Rust and TypeScript working side by side.

---

> _It is an open source project: [zed-mjml](https://github.com/pataruco/zed-mjml)._

Reviewer: Overall really nicely written with some interesting learnings and facts! Nicely laid out and digestable. I think the overall flow of the article could benefit from some story telling. I started reading section `My first encounter: a small language model` and thought cool, we're going on a journey with Pedro and i'm gonna learn something by the end.

I hit the next sections `Stained Wall` & `Zed MJML` but was left a bit confused why we pivoted directions away from your first encounter (or how they linked together).

Maybe just before your first encounter section you could outline your journey (and the journey of this article) to link things together. The summary/learnings section did a great job of pulling this all together at the end but I was a bit confused until I got there 😂

Author: Thanks @barwick 

I took your comments, rewrote the bits you suggested and changed the typescript bit to the end

<img width="1919" height="15810" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b5d4d5f5-485b-4845-b0aa-7759a39a7ae1" />
